# What is an API?

An Application Programming Interface (API) is a program that enables communication between two software components, typically on different computers. For simplicity, we'll refer to a client and a server as the two different software components. Many API's are configured such that the client submits information to the server via a query string at the end of a Uniform Resource Locator (URL). The server receives the URL, parses the query string, runs a script to gather requested information often by querying a relational database, and returns the data to the client in the requested format. Example formats include html, xml, json, or plain text.

A primary benefit of API's is that users can retrieve information from the database using intuitive query string parameters, without requiring users to understand the structure of the database. Furthermore, databases are generally configured to reject connections originating from another computer for security reasons. The API is a middle-layer that allows users to submit a request to the server, but the query itself then originates from the same server that hosts the database.

# Authentication, Authorization, Keys, and Tokens

Authentication verifies the identity of a user, generally by entering a username and password, and sometimes through additional measures like multi-factor authentication. When a user authenticates through a website, the server may store information about that user in a manner that persists through the user session. 

Authorization determines the access rights extended to a user. For example, a particular user may have access to only their own data when they log in to a website, but they are not permitted to see other users' data.

API's are often stateless, meaning that the server does not store any information about the client session on the server-side. As a result, the request submitted by the client must contain all of the necessary information for the server to authenticate the user, and verify that the user is authorized to make the request. This is often achieved using keys and/or tokens, which are text strings that are generated by the server and provided to the user. The user must then pass the key or token from the client to the server as part of authentication and/or authorization.

API keys are designed to identify the client to the server. In some cases you may need to request a key for a particular API, and generally that key will remain the same and you'll need to include it with your API requests.

Tokens are similar to keys in that they are text strings, but they often carry additional information required to authorize the user (i.e., the token bearer). Tokens are often generated when a user authenticates, and set to expire after a specified time period, at which point the user must re-authenticate to obtain a new token.
